" actual file read is ~/.ideavimrc

sethandler <C-2> a:ide
sethandler <C-S-2> a:ide
sethandler <C-6> a:ide
sethandler <C-S-6> a:ide
sethandler <C-A> a:ide
sethandler <C-B> a:ide
sethandler <C-C> a:ide
sethandler <C-D> a:ide
sethandler <C-E> a:ide
sethandler <C-F> a:ide
sethandler <C-G> a:ide
sethandler <C-H> a:ide
sethandler <C-I> a:ide
sethandler <C-J> a:ide
sethandler <C-K> a:ide
sethandler <C-L> a:ide
sethandler <C-M> a:ide
sethandler <C-N> a:ide
sethandler <C-O> a:ide
sethandler <C-P> a:ide
sethandler <C-Q> a:ide
sethandler <C-R> a:ide
sethandler <C-S> a:ide
sethandler <C-T> a:ide
sethandler <C-U> a:ide
sethandler <C-V> a:ide
sethandler <C-W> a:ide
sethandler <C-X> a:ide
sethandler <C-Y> a:ide
sethandler <C-[> a:ide
sethandler <C-\> a:ide
sethandler <C-]> a:ide
